Python and Bash script improvements. Added Example 2 (#2)
tudinfse/fex: README.md

$ fex2 install splash
$ cat <<EOF >> build_types/gcc_optimized.mk
include gcc_native.mk

> include common.mk

Reviewer: Yes, this line is indeed redundant, but I'd leave this it be, just for clarity.

Author: Ok :+1:

```shell script
$ cat <<EOF >> gcc_optimized.mk
include gcc_native.mk

> include common.mk

Reviewer: See previous comment.

Internally, we use matplotlib, but you're free to use anything else in your experiments - just re-write `plot.py`.

# Example 2: Modifying an existing experiment
In this example we will modify the splash experiment.

In the first part of this example we will:
 - Change the evaluation from cycles to peak memory consumption.
 - Change the graph to display absolute numbers.

In the second we will make the benchmarks do a smaller run.

Before starting make sure you have already executed the following:
```shell script
$ fex2 template splash
$ fex2 install splash
$ cat <<EOF >> build_types/gcc_optimized.mk
include gcc_native.mk

CFLAGS += -O3
EOF
```

> ## Example 2.1: Changing the evaluation from cycles to peak memory consumption

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Measuring peak memory consumption
```

> To change the evaluation from cycles to peak memory consumption we have to:
>  - Run our SPLASH benchmark with a profiler which can capture peak memory consumption.
>  - Adapt the collection of profile data to our new profile data.
>  - Adapt the graph generation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To measure peak memory consumption instead of cycles, we have to:
* Run the benchmarks with a different profiler, the one which can capture peak memory consumption
* Adapt the output parser
* Adapt the plot generation script
```

> ### Running the SPLASH benchmark with time
> To change the evaluation from cycles to peak memory consumption we have to run our SPLASH benchmark with a different profiler than `perf`, as `perf` does not capture peak memory consumption.
> In this example we will use `/usr/bin/time`.
> 
> We now have to add the new experiment type `time` to SPLASH.
> To add the new experiment type, we have to edit the run file of SPLASH.
> We add `time` after `perf` with the following insert:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Measuring memory consumption of SPLASH

To change the evaluation from cycles to peak memory consumption, we have to run the benchmarks with a different profiler other than `perf`. In this example we will use `/usr/bin/time`.

We now have to add a new experiment type `time` to SPLASH.
To add the new experiment type, we have to edit the `run.sh` file of SPLASH.
We add `time` after `perf` as follows:
```

```shell script
# experiments/splash/run.sh:

...
if [ "$EXPERIMENT_TYPE" == "perf" ]; then
    command='perf stat ??bin ??input 2>&1 > /dev/null'

> ### Begin of insert ###
> elif [ "$EXPERIMENT_TYPE" == "time" ]; then
>     command='/usr/bin/time --verbose ??bin ??input 2>&1 > /dev/null'
> ### End of insert ###

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# New experiment type - time
elif [ "$EXPERIMENT_TYPE" == "time" ]; then
    command='/usr/bin/time --verbose ??bin ??input 2>&1 > /dev/null'
```

else
    error_exit "splash/run.sh: Unknown experiment type" 1
fi
...
```

> Note: One could also replace the existing experiment type `perf` with `time`.

Reviewer: I'd say, it's obvious. Remove this line.

> ### Adapting the collecting of profile data to time data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Adapting the parser
```

To collect the new profile data, we have to adapt the collect script of SPLASH at `experiments/splash/collect.py`.

For that we add the experiment_type `time`:

`elif experiment_type == "time":`

> And then we add a parser which parses the memory from the new raw experiment data.\
> By looking at `/usr/bin/time` output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then we add a parser for the new output format.
A typical output of `/usr/bin/time` looks as follows:
```

```text
...
Average total size (kbytes): 0
Maximum resident set size (kbytes): 5680
Average resident set size (kbytes): 0
...
```

> We see that our desired value is a integer which is always located in a line with the text `Maximum resident set size`.
> We therefore use the following parser and name the value `memory`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We see that our desired value is a integer which is always located in a line with the text `Maximum resident set size`.
We therefore use the following parser and name the value `memory`:
```
```suggestion
The collected parameter is an integer which is always located in a line with the text `Maximum resident set size`.
We therefore use the following parser and name the value `memory`:
```

`"memory": ["Maximum resident set size", lambda l: collect.get_int_from_string(l, ignore_comma=True)]`

> The complete collect script finally looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The complete collect script:
```

```python
# experiments/splash/collect.py:

from fex2 import collect, helpers

def parse(infile, outfile, experiment_type):
    if experiment_type == "perf":
        parsers = {
            "cycles": ["cycles", lambda l: collect.get_int_from_string(l, ignore_comma=True)],
            "instructions": [" instructions ", lambda l: collect.get_int_from_string(l, ignore_comma=True)],
            "time": ["seconds time elapsed", lambda l: collect.get_float_from_string(l)],
        }
    elif experiment_type == "time":
        parsers = {
            "memory": ["Maximum resident set size", lambda l: collect.get_int_from_string(l, ignore_comma=True)]
        }
    else:
        return helpers.error_exit(1, "Unknown experiment type")

    collect.parse_logs(infile, outfile, parsers)
```

> ### Adapting the graph generation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Adapting the plot generation
```

> To plot the new memory graph, we have to adapt the plot script of SPLASH at `experiments/splash/plot.py`.
> 
> For that we insert the new `plot_type` `absolute` and create the new plot function `build_plot_absolute`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To add a new plot type, we modify `experiments/splash/plot.py`. Specifically, we insert a new `plot_type` `absolute` and create the new plot function `build_plot_absolute`:
```

```python
def build_plot(infile: str, outfile: str, plot_type: str = 'speedup'):
    if plot_type == 'speedup':
        build_plot_speedup(infile, outfile)

> ### Begin of insert ###
>     elif plot_type == 'absolute':
>         build_plot_absolute(infile, outfile)
> ### End of insert ###

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Modification start ###
    elif plot_type == 'absolute':
        build_plot_absolute(infile, outfile)
### Modification end ###
```

    else:
        helpers.error_exit(1, 'splash/plot.py: Not supported plot type')

### Begin of insert ###
RENAMINGS_ABSOLUTE = {
    "('gcc', 'native', 1)": "gcc native",
    "('gcc', 'optimized', 1)": "gcc optimized",

> }
> 
> def build_plot_absolute(infile: str, outfile: str):
> 
>     # print(df)
>     metadata_columns = ["benchmark", "type", "subtype", "thread_count"]
>     data_column = "memory"
>     all_columns = metadata_columns + [data_column]
> 
>     # load the results into a DataFrame
>     helpers.debug("Loading data")
>     df = read_csv(infile, usecols=all_columns)
>     if df.empty:
>         helpers.error_exit(1, "The input file is empty or not readable")
> 
>     # aggregate the results of repeated experiments (i.e., average across all runs of the same experiment)
>     helpers.debug("Processing results")
>     df = DataFrame({data_column: df.groupby(metadata_columns)[data_column].apply(stats.gmean, axis=0)})
>     df = df.reset_index()
> 
>     # cleanup
>     df.dropna(inplace=True)
> 
>     # To MB
>     # TODO 1 MB = 1024 or 1000?
>     df["memory"] = df["memory"] / 1024
> 
>     # restructure the table for easier plotting and calculate the overall mean values across all benchmarks
>     pivoted = df.pivot_table(
>         index="benchmark",
>         columns=["type", "subtype", "thread_count"],
>         values=data_column,
>         margins=True,
>         aggfunc=stats.gmean,
>         margins_name="mean"
>     )
>     df = DataFrame(pivoted.to_records()).set_index("benchmark", drop=True)
> 
>     # rename builds
>     df.rename(columns=RENAMINGS_ABSOLUTE, inplace=True)
> 
>     # the resulting table
>     helpers.debug("Plot data\n" + str(df))
> 
>     # build the plot
>     helpers.debug("Building a plot")
>     plt = plot.BarPlot(style=SplashBarPlotStyle)
>     plt.build(df,
>         title="Memory usage compared with GCC -O3 optimizations",
>         ylabel="Memory usage (in MB)",
>         vline_position=11.5
>         )
> 
>     plt.savefig(
>         outfile,
>         dpi="figure",
>         pad_inches=0.1,
>         bbox_inches='tight'
>     )
> ### End of insert ###

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Modification start ###

def build_plot_absolute(infile: str, outfile: str):
    metadata_columns = ["benchmark", "type", "subtype", "thread_count"]
    data_column = "memory"
    all_columns = metadata_columns + [data_column]

    # load the results into a DataFrame
    helpers.debug("Loading data")
    df = read_csv(infile, usecols=all_columns)
    if df.empty:
        helpers.error_exit(1, "The input file is empty or not readable")

    # aggregate the results of repeated experiments (i.e., average across all runs of the same experiment)
    helpers.debug("Processing results")
    df = DataFrame({data_column: df.groupby(metadata_columns)[data_column].apply(stats.gmean, axis=0)})
    df = df.reset_index()

    # cleanup
    df.dropna(inplace=True)

    # To MB
    df["memory"] = df["memory"] / 1024

    # restructure the table for easier plotting and calculate the overall mean values across all benchmarks
    pivoted = df.pivot_table(
        index="benchmark",
        columns=["type", "subtype", "thread_count"],
        values=data_column,
        margins=True,
        aggfunc=stats.gmean,
        margins_name="mean"
    )
    df = DataFrame(pivoted.to_records()).set_index("benchmark", drop=True)

    # rename builds
    df.rename(columns=RENAMINGS, inplace=True)

    # the resulting table
    helpers.debug("Plot data\n" + str(df))

    # build the plot
    helpers.debug("Building a plot")
    plt = plot.BarPlot(style=SplashBarPlotStyle)
    plt.build(df,
        title="Memory usage compared to GCC -O3 optimizations",
        ylabel="Memory usage (in MB)",
        vline_position=11.5
        )

    plt.savefig(
        outfile,
        dpi="figure",
        pad_inches=0.1,
        bbox_inches='tight'
    )
### Modification end ###
```

```

You can test the new code with the following commands:
```shell script
$ fex2 run splash -b gcc_native gcc_optimized -t time -m 1 4 -r 10 -o splash-raw-2.txt
$ fex2 collect splash -t time -i splash-raw-2.txt -o splash-collected-2.csv
$ fex2 plot splash -p absolute -i splash-collected-2.csv -o splash-2.pdf
```

> Which should give you the following graph:
> ![Graph of example 2](readme/example2_graph.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Which should give you the following plot:
![Plot of example 2](readme/example2_graph.png)
```

> ## Example 2.2: Benchmark a smaller run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Smaller inputs
```

> To run smaller benchmarks, the input file of an experiment has to be modified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes, it is necessary to run the benchmarks with some inputs other than default ones.
For example, it could be useful to quickly test and verify a small change in the experiments.

```

This can be done by modifying the column `default` of the input table.
The input table `input.csv` can be found in the respective experiment folder.
In this example we are going to adapt the splash benchmark.
The splash input table is located at `experiments/splash/input.csv`.

The `test` column of the input table has easier benchmark inputs then the `default` column.
We can therefore copy the inputs of the test column into the default column to get smaller benchmarks.
With that, the `ocean` benchmark is for instance changed from `-p$thread_count -n258` to `-p$thread_count -n18`.

You can test the new inputs with the normal run command:
```shell script
$ fex2 run splash -b gcc_native gcc_optimized -t time -m 1 4 -r 10 -o splash-raw-2.txt
```

> Which should now run a bit faster.

Reviewer: Oh, I forgot that I did not implement this feature. The user should not modify `input.csv`. Instead, the type should be selected on command line, as an argument to `fex2 run ...`. Something like `fex2 run ... --benchmark-input test`.

Let's leave this section of readme as-is for the time being, but this feature will need to be implemented eventually.

Internally, we use matplotlib, but you're free to use anything else in your experiments - just re-write `plot.py`.

# Example 2: Modifying an existing experiment
In this example we will modify the splash experiment.

In the first part of this example we will:
 - Change the evaluation from cycles to peak memory consumption.

>  - Change the graph to display absolute numbers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Change the plot to display absolute numbers.
```

In computer science, the word graph has a very specific meaning: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graph_theory

If you use it as a synonym to "plot", people will get confused.
